Docs: Edit of "ISSUE_TRIAGE" and other topics (part 3 of doc quality project) (#88106)
grafana/grafana: contribute/ISSUE_TRIAGE.md

# Triage issues

The main goal of issue triage is to categorize all incoming Grafana issues and make sure each issue has all the essential information needed for anyone to understand and be able to start working on it.

> > **Note:** This information is for Grafana project Maintainers, Owners, and Admins. If you are a Contributor, then you will not be able to perform most of the tasks in this topic.

Reviewer: Chance to use a contraction for tone

```suggestion
> **Note:** This information is for Grafana project Maintainers, Owners, and Admins. If you are a Contributor, then you won't be able to perform most of the tasks in this topic.
```

> > **Note:** This information is for Grafana project Maintainers, Owners, and Admins. If you are a Contributor, then you won't be able to perform most of the tasks in this topic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{< admonition type="note" >}}
This information is for Grafana project Maintainers, Owners, and Admins. If you are a Contributor, then you won't be able to perform most of the tasks in this topic.
{{< /admonition >}}
```

Author: no admonitions for /contribute, use markdown

#### Subscribe to all notifications

The more advanced, but recommended way is to subscribe to all notifications from this repository which means that all new issues, pull requests, comments and important status changes are sent to your configured email address. Read this [guide](https://help.github.com/en/articles/watching-and-unwatching-repositories#watching-a-single-repository) for help with setting this up.

It's highly recommended that you set up filters to automatically remove emails from the inbox and label them accordingly. When issues are properly categorized you can easily understand when you need to act upon a notification or where to look to find issues that haven't been triaged.

Instructions for setting up filters in Gmail can be found [here](#setting-up-gmail-filters). Another alternative is to use [Trailer](https://github.com/ptsochantaris/trailer) or similar software.

### 2. Ensure the issue contains basic information

> Before triaging an issue very far, make sure that the issue's author provided the standard  information. This will help you make an educated recommendation on how to categorize the issue. The Grafana project uses [GitHub issue templates](https://docs.github.com/en/communities/using-templates-to-encourage-useful-issues-and-pull-requests/configuring-issue-templates-for-your-repository) to guide contributors to provide standard information that must be included for each type of template or type of issue.

Reviewer: Stays in the present

```suggestion
Before triaging an issue very far, make sure that the issue's author provided the standard  information. This helps you make an educated recommendation on how to categorize the issue. The Grafana project uses [GitHub issue templates](https://docs.github.com/en/communities/using-templates-to-encourage-useful-issues-and-pull-requests/configuring-issue-templates-for-your-repository) to guide contributors to provide standard information that must be included for each type of template or type of issue.
```

#### Standard issue information that must be included

> Various [issue templates](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/issues/new/choose) are used by the issue author to collect information from the issue reporter. The following list describes the standard issue information that must be included.

Author: fixed

- Grafana plugins:
- Others:

##### Enhancement requests

> > **Note:** Prior to August, 2023, community-submitted feature requests were submitted as [Github discussions](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/discussions). These are now submitted using the [feature request issue template](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/issues/new?assignees=&labels=type%2Ffeature-request&projects=&template=1-feature_requests.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{< admonition type="note" >}}
Prior to August, 2023, community-submitted feature requests were submitted as [Github discussions](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/discussions). These are now submitted using the [feature request issue template](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/issues/new?assignees=&labels=type%2Ffeature-request&projects=&template=1-feature_requests.md).
{{< /admonition >}}
```

Grafana Labs is dedicated to improving our graphical user interfaces and overall experience so that our product becomes usable and accessible for people with disabilities as well as anyone else. Learn more about Grafana's commitment to [A11y](https://grafana.com/accessibility/) (accessibility).

##### Support requests

In general, if the issue description and title is perceived as a question no more information is needed. See how to categorize these requests [here](#support-requests-1).

#### Good practices

To make it easier for everyone to understand and find issues a good rule of thumbs is to:

- Make sure that issue titles are named to explain the subject of the issue, are spelled correctly, and don't include irrelevant or sensitive information.
- Make sure that issue descriptions don't include irrelevant information, information from a template that hasn't been filled out, or sensitive information.
- Do your best effort to change the title and description or request suggested changes by adding a comment.

> > **Note:** The above rules apply to both new and existing issues of the Grafana project.

Reviewer: https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#above

```suggestion
> **Note:** The preceding rules apply to both new and existing issues of the Grafana project.
```

> > **Note:** The preceding rules apply to both new and existing issues of the Grafana project.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be deleted, but if you want to keep it, please use the admonition shortcode.

#### Do you have all the information needed to categorize an issue?

> Depending on the issue, you might not feel all this information is needed. Use your best judgement. If you cannot triage an issue using what its author provided, explain kindly to the author that they must provide the above information to clarify the problem. Label issue with `needs more info` and add any related `area/*` or `datasource/*` labels. Alternatively, use `bot/needs more info` label and the Grafana bot will request it for you.

Reviewer: https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#above
```suggestion
Depending on the issue, you might not feel all this information is needed. Use your best judgement. If you cannot triage an issue using what its author provided, explain kindly to the author that they must provide the previously mentioned information to clarify the problem. Label issue with `needs more info` and add any related `area/*` or `datasource/*` labels. Alternatively, use `bot/needs more info` label and the Grafana bot will request it for you.
```

If the author provides the standard information, but you are still unable to triage the issue, request additional information. Do this kindly and politely because you are asking for more of the author's time.

If the author does not respond to the requested information within a week, close the issue with a kind note stating that the author can request for the issue to be reopened when the necessary information is provided.

> When you feel you have all the information needed, then you're ready to [categorize the issue](#3-categorizing-an-issue).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you feel you have all the information needed, then you're ready to [categorize the issue](#3-categorize-an-issue).
```

If you receive a notification with additional information provided, but you aren't on issue triage anymore and you feel you don't have time to handle it, you should delegate it to the current person on issue triage.

> ### 3. Categorizing an issue

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3. Categorize an issue
```

1. Either [ask for more information](#2-ensure-the-issue-contains-basic-information) needed to investigate it more thoroughly.
2. Either [delegate further investigations](#investigation-of-issues) to someone else.

**It works as intended (that is, by design):**

1. Kindly and politely add a comment explaining briefly why we think it works as intended and close the issue.
2. Label the issue `type/works-as-intended`.

#### Enhancement or feature request?

> 1. Label the issue `type/feature-request` and add at least one `area/*` or `datasource/*` label.

Reviewer 2: should use lazy numbering here

2. Make sure the submitter has justified why this feature requests is important.

#### Documentation issue?

First, evaluate if the documentation makes sense to be included in the Grafana project:

- Is this something we want and can maintain as a project?
- Is this referring to usage of some specific integration and in that case is that a popular use case in combination with Grafana?
- If unsure, kindly and politely add a comment explaining that we would need [upvotes](https://github.blog/2016-03-10-add-reactions-to-pull-requests-issues-and-comments) to identify that lots of other users want or need this.

Second, label the issue `type/docs` and at least one `area/*` or `datasource/*` label.

**Minor typo/error/lack of information:**

There's a minor typo, error, or lack of information that adds a lot of confusion for users and is a big win to fix it:

1. Either update the documentation yourself and open a pull request.

> 2. Either delegate the work to someone else by assigning that person to the issue. Note that the milestone is automatically assigned and usually doesn't need to be manually edited.

Reviewer 2: should use lazy numbering here

Author: good catch. i have added lazy numbers throughout doc

### Automation

We have some automation that triggers on comments or labels being added to issues. Many of these automated behaviors are defined in [commands.json](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/.github/commands.json). Or in other [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/tree/main/.github/workflows)

To learn more about bot actions, refer to our [bot documentation](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/.github/bot.md).

### External PRs

Part of issue triage should also be triaging of external PRs. The main goal should be to make sure PRs from external contributors have an owner and aren't forgotten.

1. Check new external PRs which don't have a reviewer. You can easily search for pull requests made by external contributors by using the label: `pr/external` in your [query search](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/pulls?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Apr+label%3Apr%2Fexternal) Note: external PRs are automatically labeled with `pr/external` upon creation.
2. Check if there is a link to an existing issue. The link to a existing issue should be in the description section, underneath “Which issue(s) does this PR fix?:”.

> 3. If not, and you know which issue it is solving, add the link yourself. Otherwise, ask the author to link the issue or create one.

Reviewer 2: this should be a part of the previous step. also use lazy numbering

Author: fixed

4. Assign a reviewer based on who was handling the linked issue or what code or feature the PR touches (if all else fails, look at who was the last to make changes).

### Appendix

#### Setting up Gmail filters

If you're using Gmail, a best practice is to set up filters to automatically remove emails from the inbox and label them to make it easy for you to understand when you need to act upon a notification. You should be able to promptly process all incoming issues that haven't been triaged.

This may be set up by personal preference, but here's a working configuration for reference:

1. Follow instructions in [gist](https://gist.github.com/marefr/9167c2e31466f6316c1cba118874e74f)

> 2. In Gmail, go to **Settings** -> **Filters and Blocked Addresses**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. In Gmail, go to **Settings** > **Filters and Blocked Addresses**.
```

1. Label the issue `priority/unscheduled`.

> 2. Consider requesting [help from the community](#5-requesting-help-from-the-community).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Consider requesting [help from the community](#5-request-help-from-the-community).
```

> ### 5. Requesting help from the community

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 5. Request help from the community
```

> It's generally a good idea to consider signalling to the community that help from community is appreciated and needed in case an issue isn't prioritized to be worked on by maintainers. Use your best judgement. In general, requesting help from the community means that a contribution has a good chance of getting accepted and merged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's generally a good idea to consider signaling to the community that help is appreciated and needed in case an issue isn't prioritized to be worked on by maintainers. Use your best judgement. In general, requesting help from the community means that a contribution has a good chance of getting accepted and merged.
```

> In many cases the issue author or community as a whole is more suitable to contribute changes since they're experts in their domain. It's also quite common that someone has tried to get something to work using the documentation without success, made an effort to get it to work, and/or reached out to the [community site](https://community.grafana.com/) to get the missing information. 

Reviewer: I think this should be rewritten to avoid `and/or`

  - Grafana
```

> - All notifications you’ll need to take action on should show up as unread in GitHub (mine) and its sub-labels.
> - All notifications you don’t need to take action on show up as unread in GitHub (other) and its sub-labels.

Reviewer: Because it's a UI element in your inbox.

```suggestion
- All notifications you’ll need to take action on should show up as unread in **GitHub (mine)** and its sub-labels.
- All notifications you don’t need to take action on show up as unread in **GitHub (other)** and its sub-labels.
```
